ASIZ and SI circuits FAQ. Last update: 1/7/2003

Q: What do I put in the input file?

A: The best is to edit the circuit with the EdFil editor.
  For SI circuits, include all the transistors and switches,
  omitting all the bias sources (that is, set them to
  zero). Use a unitary current source as input, and take
  the output over a unitary load resistor. For SC circuits,
  draw them normally using operational amplifiers, capacitors,
  and switches, with a voltage source as input. The op.
  amps. can be ideal or can have a finite voltage gain.
  Use normalized values for the transistor transconductances
  and for capacitances in SC circuits, as only the ratios among
  them are important.
  The EdFil editor will generate two files, one with suffix
  ".cir" containing the drawing, and one with suffix ".net"
  that is the netlist, the input for the ASIZ program.

Q: Why the program complains of "system determinant too small"?

A: The circuit is unsolvable by one of these reasons, usually:
  There is no ground connection.
  Part of the circuit is floating at some phase.
  The element values are not normalized and very small.
It can also happen that part of the circuit is connected
to ground through a "too complex" capacitive network. See
the papers describing the program for details about this
highly unusual condition.

Q: Why the program complains of "forbidden circuit"?

A: Some circuits are forbidden, as switches short-circuiting
voltage sources, closed switch loops, or switches short-
circuiting inputs or outputs of operational amplifiers.

Q: How to analyze clock feedthrough effects with ASIZ?

A: Do the following:
- Remove the input current source(s).
- Add capacitances to the switches. Each phase "n" switch
  receives one capacitance at each side, both connected
  to a "phase n" voltage source. The values of these
  capacitances must have values proportional to the actual
  switch capacitances, considering the values set in the
  "mos transistor parameters" window. If the default values
  are used, all the transistors have a 1F normalized Cgs
  capacitance. It is better to set the use of Cgs capaci-
  tances proportional to the transconductance values, and
  set the switch capacitances accordingly. Use normalized
  values.
- The phase voltage sources should have the correct control
  signal waveforms for an accurate analysis. A sinusoidal
  signal can be used as approximation, with a normal
  voltage source being used for phase 1, and an inverted
  source for phase 2. The frequency of these sources (set
  in the "transient analysis parameters" window) must be
  set to the switching frequency, and the phase shall be
  set to a few degrees to account for the delay between the
  application of the control signal and the actual closing
  of the switches.
  Note that as ASIZ does not allow the setting of different
  phases for input sources, this analysis is possible only
  for two-phases circuits (but it is possible to simulate
  different input waveforms by adding switches).
- Add enough segments per phase for good precision, and
  plot the transient response. Set the sampling mode to
  "none" ("analysis parameters" window) for correct results.
This analysis considers only linear effects, and is qualita-
tive, serving only as a mean to compare structures, and
detect problems as clock feedthrough integration. More precise
results can be obtained (with version 1.6 and above) by
preparing an input signal file with a simulated clock
waveform.

Q: What results are expected about clock feedthrough integra-
tion in SI integrators?

A: Both 1st generation and 2nd generation SI integrators will
integrate clock feedthrough if there is any assymmetry in
the capacitances at the memory transistors' gates.
Note that this always occur in usual SI filters, unless
capacitance is added to the unused sides of these integrators
to compensate for the loading of the Cgs capacitances of the
transistors used to make copies of the output signal.
"Component simulation" structures are naturally balanced,
and so do not integrate clock feedthrough, in the form with
modulated signals. In the form with normal signals, they inte-
grate. 

Q: In a multiphase circuit with four phases, the output is being
sampled only in one of the phases. Why is the frequency response
showing replicas corresponding to a sampling rate higher than the
sampling frequency specified?

A: If in some point of the circuit the signal is being processed
more than once per sampling period, the decimation of the output
signal is not enough to change the effective sampling rate, that
in this case can be of two or four times the specified sampling
frequency. In general, the effective sampling rate of a multiphase
circuit can reach f times the switching frequency, where f is the
number of phases.

Q: I have two circuits with identical transient responses for a
sinusoidal input of frequency f0. Why are the frequency responses
at f=f0 for the two circuits different? For example, try a voltage
source connected by a switch to a capacitor and to a resistor.
The switching is in four phases, and the switch is closed at phases
1 and 4. For f0 equal to the switching frequency, the output for
a cosinusoidal signal is identical in the two cases. But the fre-
quency responses of the two circuits at this frequency are different.

A: Look at the spectrum. There is an aliasing term at the switching
frequency, that when added to the displayed response results in the
correct value for both cases. This is a consequence of how the
effect of continuous couplings are taken into account. When there
are components generated by aliasing that fall at the input frequency,
these effects can appear.

Q: How can I print the ASIZ plots?

A: For the PC version, run it under Windows and use the Print Screen
key to capture the screen image to the clipboard. Before this, use
the "i" and "c" keys to create images with white background and black
lines, that print better. Edit the image in a paint program, to clip
what you want of the image, add text labels, and adjust colors. If you
want the window borders to appear, use the paint program to change
the colors of the borders to a light color, as yellow.
If you will use the Paintbrush program, remember to set the image size
to 640x480 pixels and to put it in zoom out mode before pasting the
clipboard image to it.
For the Sun version, capture the image with the XV program, for example,
and edit the colors (to white background and black lines) with it.
