Examples files for the ASIZ program:

   The  files are distributed as the EdFil descriptions  (.CIR), 
the ASIZ input files (.NET) and value lists (.VAL).

LP5SC4 - 5th order bilinear elliptic SC filter with  4  phases. 
Output  node:21.  A circuit used as example  in  various  papers 
about  SC circuit analysis. From: J. A. Nossek and G. C.  Temes, 
"Switched-Capacitor  filter design using bilinear element  mode-
ling", IEEE Trans. Circ. Syst., pp. 481-491, June 1980.

LP6BSI  - 6th order bilinear Chebyschev SI filter in cascade  of
biquads. From: J. B. Hughes, I. C. Macbeth, and D. M.  Pattullo, 
"Switched  current filters", IEE Proceedings, Vol. 137,  Pt.  G, 
No. 2, pp. 156-162, April 1990.

LP5BSI  - 5th order bilinear Chebyshev SI filter using  bilinear 
integrators.  Value list: CH5.VAL. From: I. Song and G.  W.  Ro-
berts, "A 5th order bilinear switched-current Chebyshev filter", 
Proc.  1993  IEEE ISCAS, Chicago, IL, USA,  pp.  1097-1100,  May 
1993.

LP5E1SI  - 5th order bilinear low-pass filter using  first-gene-
ration Euler integrators. From: G. Roberts and A. Sedra, Chapter 
9  of  the book "Switched-currents, an  analogue  technique  for 
digital technology", Edited by C. Toumazou, J. B. Hughes and  N. 
C.  Battersby, IEE, London, 1993. The formulas for the  elements 
were  taken from the following example. Value list:  CH5.VAL  or 
EL5.VAL.

LP5E2SI - 5th order bilinear low-pass filter using  second-gene-
ration Euler integrators. From: A. C. M. de Queiroz and P. R. M. 
Pinheiro, "Bilinear switched-current ladder filters using  Euler 
integrators". IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems-I,  Vol. 
43,  No.  1,  January 1996, pp. 66-70. Value  list:  CH5.VAL  or 
EL5.VAL.

BP6BSI  -  6th order bilinear elliptic  band-pass  filter  using 
bilinear  integrators.  The value list is  the  file  BP610.VAL. 
From: A. C. M. de Queiroz and P. M. Pinheiro,  "Switched-current 
ladder  band-pass filters", Proc. 1994 IEEE ISCAS,  London,  UK, 
pp. 309-312, May 1994.

BP6ESI  -  6th order bilinear elliptic  band-pass  filter  using 
Euler  integrators.  Value list: BP610.VAL. From: A.  C.  M.  de 
Queiroz  and P. M. Pinheiro, "Switched-current ladder  band-pass 
filters",  Proc. 1994 IEEE ISCAS, London, UK, pp.  309-312,  May 
1994.

   Eight  different  basic structures for SI  low-pass  bilinear 
filters, all of 5th order, and using the value lists CH5.VAL  or 
EL5.VAL, for Chebyshev or Cauer (elliptic) filters:

BILIN1S  -Bilinear filter using first-generation bilinear  inte-
grators.

BILIN2S -Bilinear filter using second-generation bilinear  inte-
grators.

EULER1S  -Bilinear filter using first-generation Euler  integra-
tors.

EULER2S -Bilinear filter using second-generation Euler  integra-
tors.

CSBILIND-Bilinear  filter  using  component-simulation  bilinear 
integrators in direct form.

CSBILINM-Bilinear  filter  using  component-simulation  bilinear 
integrators in modulated form.

CSEULERD-Bilinear filter using component-simulation Euler  inte-
grators in direct form.

CSEULERM-Bilinear filter using component-simulation Euler  inte-
grators in modulated form.

   For  component-simulation filters, see: J. Schechtman, A.  C. 
M.  de Queiroz, and L. P. Caloba, "Switched-current  filters  by 
component  simulation",  Analog Integrated Circuits  and  Signal 
Processing, july 1997, pp. 303-309.

CKFT-Example of clock feedthrough analysis,  showing clock feed-
through cancellation by scaled replication. See:  A. C.  M.  de
Queiroz and J. Schechtman, "Elimination of nonlinear clock feed-
through in component-simulation switched-current circuits", 1998
IEEE ISCAS, Monterey, EUA, may 1998, Vol. I, pp. 325-328.

OSCILL - Two-integrator-loop SC oscillator.  The voltage  source
supplies an initial condition if set to be a step.  The  program
doesn't accept interchange between the source and the  capacitor
in series with it, due to the limitations on the structures that
it can analyze.

   Most of the examples include formulas for the element  values 
in the .CIR file. The EdFil program evaluates these formulas  to 
obtain the final element values for the netlist file. To  design 
a different filter, it is enough to change the rate the  netlist 
file. The value lists included are element values for passive LC 
doubly  terminated  ladder filters, with  appropriate  frequency 
predistortion  for  a bilinear filter, nor-malized  for  unitary 
terminations.
   The examples of bilinear Chebyshev filters illustrate  possi-
ble problems in finding multiple transmission zeros. Change  the 
magnitude tolerance in the poles and zeros parameters window  to 
a  higher value to compute correctly the multiple zeros  at  the 
Nyquist frequency in these filters.
   The output node for all the SI filters is 1. In all the exam-
ples  the  correct transfer function is  obtained  with  impulse 
sampling.

ACMQ -01/07/2003 
